The second step consists of setting the seventh but of the 64 bit address this but identifies the 48
but MAC addresses uniqueness or lack there of an ethernet address has two significances.
It's either globally managed or locally managed globally managed means that you use the Venda MAC address
locally managed means that you rewrite the MAC address with your own value.
In other words you change the MAC address to a locally significant value.
So that's seven.
But all the usual but is set to either one which means the address is unique or set to zero meaning
the address is not unique.
Now in this example let's assume that we're using a vendor MAC address.
So in other words this part gets sick to one if you have a binary value of six zeros followed by one
followed by zero.
Converting that back to hexadecimal will give you a value of 0 2.
So just to reiterate you have a hexadecimal value of 0 0 that's converted into binary the seventh binary
but is either set to 1 or 0 depending whether it's globally unique or not globally unique.
That is then converted back to hexadecimal.
So once again the V-6 aggregate of all global unicast address is 128 bits in length half of the address
is the network prefix which is 64 bits and half of the addresses the interface identify which is 64
bits the network prefix is broken up into two major parts.
You have the global routing prefix which is used for the public apology.
In other words the Internet and the subnet ID which is used for the site topology.
In other words the subnet portion of the address would be used to create subnets within an enterprise
or within an organization or within a site.
It's 16 but same length that means that a service provider will give you a slash 48 subnet for every
site organization that you manage that gives you 16 bits for subnets which allows you to create 65000
536 subnets within your organization from one subnet given to you by the service provider.
You would continue using a 64 mosque on every link no matter whether it's a point to point link or an
Ethernet subnet the service provider network consists of a slush Forty-Eight network your internal networks
consist of flesh 64 subnets.
So once again the ISP will allocate your slush forty eight subnet you will allocate a slice 64 subnet
to each interface.
Once again no need to do complicated submitting all your subnets or slash 64 was from the slash forty
eight that you were allocated by your service provider.
Remember there is no net all internal addresses within your organization are using these IP V-6 aggregated
all global unicast addresses which are the equivalent of public IP addresses with an IP version 4 the
version 6 address is actually broken up into more fields.
I wouldn't worry too much about this but I just want to show you the actual format for this aggregated
global unit cost address.
You firstly have the interface identify which is 64 bits in length.
I've explained that that identifies the equivalent of the host portion in an IP version 4 address.
The next part is the SLA ID or site level aggregation identifier.
This is like your subnet identifier which represents subnets within an organization its 16 bits in length
giving you over 65000 subnets to use within a site or an organization.
Then you have the ID which is the next level aggregation identifier.
And this will be used by your ISP.
They are a reserved bits which are not currently used and then you have the TSA ID which is the top
level aggregation identifier used by various regional Internet registries around the world the Internet
registries will then assign TLM IDs to large ISP is specifically transit providers and exchanges.
And then lastly we have the format prefix which is set to 001 once again this portion of the address
is the public typology and we are not particularly concerned with that in this course within enterprises
or sites we would have the subnet ID which is used for site typology.
And then once again the interface ID which is used as the host portion of an IP B-6 address.
The advantage of this IPV 6 address layout is aggregation.
It allows for aggregation or summarization of addresses within the global Internet.
Just be aware as well that every ITV 6 interface contains at least one loopback address which is cold
uncurl and one slash 128 optioning interfaces might include multiple unique local and global addresses.
This is an important concept in provision for on a Cisco router.
You can only allocate a single IP address as the primary IP address on that interface.
All subsequent IP addresses are configured a secondary IP addresses.
However an IP version 6 you can configure multiple primary IP addresses on an interface.
That's quite a major change from IP version for.
I'll show you in a moment when you enable IPV 6 on a Cisco routers interface multiple IP addresses are
automatically allocated to that interface.
And once again the whole reason for this address layout is aggregation and summarization.
So let's look at global aggregation in Internet registry.
We'll have for instance a slash 16 address so 2001 colon colon slash 16 a slash 32 subnet is allocated
to an ISP.
So in this example 2001 Carlon one two three four colon colon slash 32 is allocated let's say for instance
to this ISP the service provider can then allocate a slash forty eight subnet to an organization or
enterprise.
So in this example let's assume that 2000 on one call on 1 2 3 4 call on 1 call and call and slash 48
is allocated to customer.
A customer can then subnet the slash 48 to slash 64 subnets and allocate those subnets to every interface
within the organization.
So nerdish year 2001 one two three four Colan one which is a slash forty eight subnet.
The Enterprise was allocated is subnetwork again to Colon to Colon colon.
In other words a slash 64 subnet is allocated to this interface.
And then notice over here three is allocated to this interface all link just to help you once again
with these addresses.
Remember these values on hexadecimal a single value in hex equates to four binary bits.
So we have one two three four hexadecimal values for hex values times for 16 binary.
That's.
So this is actually a 16 bit address.
Hence slash 16 by the same token here remember this is 16 and this is 16 so the values between the colons
are 16 bit values so 16 for 16 gives you 32 so hence slash 32.
Once again here we have another valley between Colon's so it's 16 16 and 16.
Remember leading zeros can be dropped in an address.
So that gives you 48 bits in 48 and lost the this address there is 1 2 3 4 values between colons leading
zeroes have been dropped.
So that's four times sixteen giving you slash 64.
I hope that helps you decipher the address a little easier.
Please note on the subnets we have not displayed the host portion of the address.
Now without further ado let's set up a basic IP version 6 network.
In this example I have Route 1 and router to both route have a foster ethernet interface router one's
network and the Ethan and interfaces going to be 2001 column one column one code on one router to use
force Ethernet subnet is going to be 2001 Carlon one Cullin one code and three the rod is connected
by a serial link and the subnet is going to be two thousand in one color and one color in one color.
Notice once again the subnet mask is always slushed 64 on all subnets.
OK so in Rato one I'm going to break out of the initial configuration dialog
go into global config mode and give the Rodda a name and then I'm going to enable IPV 6 UNI costs routeing
so that we can run the B-6 on the serrata and then I'm going to go into it 0 0 the first ethernet interface
and give it an address or IP V-6 and notice there are a lot of options here.
But I'm going to specify a dress and then I'm going to specify an IP V-6 address.
So 2001
and in this case I'm going to give the interface an address of one that's as simple as that to configure
an IP version 6 address on a router.
This portion is the network portion.
And notice we've got code on Colan So there are a bunch of zeros not displayed here.
And we ending in a one and then I can no shut the interface and as you can see it interfaces come up
so knock on top do paying two thousand and one
and paying the kids race.
And as you can see the ping is successful on the serials zero interface.
I can do the same thing IPV six the drapes 2001
and on this side I'm giving it an address of Colan one.
And on this side I'm going to give an address of colon to some rodded to do the same thing.
Enable IPV six unit costs routing and then on it seriously I sirra give it an ITV 6 address 2001
no shut the interface and 0 0 0 give it an address
and I shut that interface.
So hopefully now from router to I should be able to ping Router one
that doesn't work because I forgot to shut the interface on the side so I'll know shut it and go back
to it to see if the thing succeeds this time.
That interface came up and as you can see the ping succeeded.
It's as simple as that to configure IP addresses on a Cisco router.
Now on the first ethernet interface I could give it another IP address so I could say IPV six the drapes.
So let's just be lazy that's given an address of 2001 Carlon call on one 64.
Now as you can see the rod has accepted that address on the road.
I cannot ping 2001 called On-Call on one and as you can see the thing succeeds like I got to the interface
and give it an address as follows.
IPV 6 address and it's a 2001 Carlon to Colon colon.
Notice it gives you the option of link local address but we don't want to do that.
Let's go for Slash 64.
Notice please I haven't cooked a host portion on this address.
Just specify the network portion and now what I can do is I can specify UI 64 and hit enter.
So we are going to use the Mac address as part of that address.
So now I can type the command show run interface seriously sirra to show you the configuration.
And as you can see there's no provision for address configured on this interface.
There are only IP version 6 addresses and there are three IP version 6 addresses that we have manually
configured.
I couldn't up show interface 0 0 the MAC address of this interface is C 4 0 1 0 8 followed by four zeros.
So the Venda portion of this address is C 4 0 1 0 F and the unique portion is e-rate followed by four
zeros.
So just to display that nicely I'm going to say show interface 0 0 pipe include the a.
So it only shows that Mac address in the output.
And there it is and then I'm going to type show IPV 6 interface 0 0 and only include the addresses that
we configured and the other three IP addresses be configured on the interface so noted here please.
We'll start from the right inside the unique portion of the MAC address is eight followed by four zeros.
There it is in the IP address.
Remember leading zeros can be dropped.
So this zero represents those four zeros the eight is the right over there.
If if if he has been inserted in the address to make it 64 bucks and then notice the remaining portion
is C 4 0 1 0 F which is represented here as C 6 0 1 F..
Once again leading zeros can be removed.
Notice the zero in front of this f has been removed.
See 4 0 1 has been converted to see 6 0 1 because the 7th but has been changed to a one to represent
at this mac addresses globally unique.
So notice the IP address is derived from the MAC address by using the UI representation of the MAC address
or.